As a writer the next most coveted honor and opportunity beyond being published was speaking. To speak in public in front of hundreds of people seemed more immediate, more impactful, (not to mention way more scary) than having tens of thousands of anonymous readers. And what better way to be true to your words, outside of writing a book, than to share them with a live audience, allowing them a raw unobstructed view to your inner most thoughts.

Not all speaking gigs are created equal. For me the most coveted speaking gig was a TED talk, so I was floored and amazed when in 2012 just after my memoir was published I got a note on Facebook from an old friend of my sisters now living in Santa Cruz California who it turned out did PR for TEDx Santa Cruz. It wasn’t the “real” TED conference, but hey, I thought a great start. And weren’t some of the “best” the most engaging and insightful, if not popular TED talks actually TEDx talks? Hello Brene Brown, Hello Cameron Russell.

After numerous screens, conversations and edited pitches with the organizers I was accepted and then scheduled to speak at TEDx Santa Cruz in September 2012. I was at first elated and then startled by this act of daring. There’s was a mighty fine production at a gorgeous 400 seat theater on the Cabrillo College campus; flashy lights, multiple cameras, influential line-up. I would have 12 minutes. NO NOTES, no prompter. I started to get nervous, and then nauseous.

To be fair, this was not my first go round at the rodeo. I had taught in the front of classrooms for years, goofily cheering on third and fourth graders about how to write poetry, had given dozens and dozens of poetry readings from dive bars to university classrooms, and even a few talks at the local Chamber of Commerce. But something about the TED brand, the production and the spectacle of it all grew larger and larger in my mind gnawing further and further into the recesses of my ego as the day approached.

The initial nervous sparks turned into a recurring stomach ache, and then a chronic nauseous dread settled in. I scoured the web for speaking tips and principles on how to give a great TED talk. I watched a million TED talks overwhelmed by the great ones, baffled by the average ones. I joined Toastmasters and even felt pretty good about myself for thirty seconds or so, because of all the newbies at Toastmasters taking a brave pill and sputtering away for the first time.

Watching Brene Brown and Elizabeth Gilbert just filled me with a more acute terror. They appeared so spot on, so passionate, so at ease with themselves.  I wrote and rewrote my talk four hundred and twenty seven thousand times. I finally settled on something I thought was fairly decent. I read it and reread it. I read it out loud in front of the mirror, to my dog Jupiter, to the planet Jupiter, to the canopy of trees and the stars beyond. Over and over again I read until I was almost sick of it. I tried to embody my talk with dynamic gestures, imagining myself practicing some arcane actorly rehearsals  as I were Sir Richard Burton gearing up for MacBeth at the Royal Shakespeare theater. I was going to be alive on stage, in my body and deliver something PROFOUND dammit. And I was NOT going to forget one squirmy little line.

My memory has never been good, nor have I ever been particularly quick on my verbal feet. I wasn’t adept at ad-libbing or being spontaneous. This would spell certain doom. So I committed the talk to memory. The day approached and I was close to complete mental and physical embodiment, but my fear kept chewing away at an absolutely flawless delivery.

I arrived at the theater filled with a drop of excitement drowned out by a leaden sea of dread. I met up with the organizers who told me casually to settle in and relax, it’s going to be great and then with a cute little pat on the back said, “Oh and by the way, you’ll be closing the whole event. No pressure.” They chuckled. I gasped and sputtered turned pale with fright, tried not to throw up at their feet. “You’ll do great” they assured me.

I went back to the green room doubled over in terror. I tried to talk to the other speakers but could only nod distractedly, grunt and moan. They smiled politely and moved away from me. I paced around back stage shaking and wringing my hands, alternating back and forth from sweating to shivering. I went for a walk around the building muttering to myself about the virtues of food trucks rather than practicing my lines. I attempted all manner of breathing exercise and meditation technique. Nothing seemed to help, except surrendering to extreme bodily discomfort. I even got some bodywork done back stage. I was in over my head. I should bail, claim sudden illness, politely bow out.

The day crept on agonizingly slow, closer and closer to my twelve titanic minutes of shame and disgrace. I had a hard time listening to, let alone appreciating the other speakers. And then there I was suddenly being wired up and introduced. I practically ran out on stage, not so much excited, as bewildered into motion as if being pushed into traffic. If I ran at the cars maybe they would swerve around me. But after a couple steps all I could muster was a limp jog. The cars revved their engines and sped toward me, headlights and shiny grills stared eagerly at me, waiting for me to regale them with profound insight, wisdom and beauty in a voice of startling authority and warmth.

I started talking and let the words fall out of my mouth like small pieces of broken glass. I was half-expecting to begin with a shrill high-pitched squeak, for at least my voice to crack and shutter. But instead there was a terror-fueled mechanical propulsion coming through me from some distant planet. The words marched out of my mouth as commanded. I was following along nicely keeping an edgy pace, not even losing my thoughts. Maybe I’m on a roll I thought between sharp blooms of abdominal pain. Until 10 minutes and 40 seconds in where I was just revving up for my big epiphany, the denouement, my irresistible “call to action” —I was going to get a TED ovation dammit!

But instead I blanked. I stumbled over one of my lines and then lost track and went mute. There was mostly nothing there except a tangled pile of broken sentences far off in the foggy distance. That, and of course a blaring silence baring down on me with such intensity, that I had to jump out of the way to avoid being crushed to death. After far too many split seconds of the lights above me burning a hole in my scalp and drowning in the agonizing silence, all I could do was shrug my shoulders and say “I guess that’s it.” I ran off the stage tail clenched tight between my legs my whole body vibrating with a grating devastating humiliation followed by a lazy puff of relief. In that moment I could at least go crawl back into my little egoic hole of pride and invisibility, and if nothing else, be done with this god awful smoldering dread searing a hole in my stomach. I was free to go back to being ordinary. What a relief. Sort of.

Here we are a few years later with a hair of perspective thinking about the virtues of lambasting myself for all the things I didn’t do during that talk. How I didn’t connect with the audience. How I could barely even see them, which made me feel for a second maybe they couldn’t see me and I’d be OK up here babbling away in a halo of invisibility. How I realized I wasn’t actually speaking to them, because I was so busy trying to stay on task with the memorization, with the proper gestures and pauses. How even though I was talking about vulnerable things I wasn’t actually being vulnerable. How I constructed a huge wall of perceived strength, memory and togetherness which crumbled immediately. How I wasn’t actually being in the emotionality of my experience. How I was too busy trying to get it right, trying to say the right thing, trying to be the star of the show. How it was all about me, when it should have been all about them.

This is what great speakers (and writers) do, they make it about the audience, they connect with the audience first and foremost. They are not preoccupied with themselves with being seen in a certain way, with being loved, appreciated and understood, as nice as that is. I thought I had mastered that after all the teaching and speaking I’d already done. When I spoke to kids it was always about them. I rarely got nervous. I created this whole big thing around the importance of TEDx and of getting the ovation and having it launch my career like it did for Brene Brown, and instead I carried on like a self-conscious madman. And in spite of it all, the truth was I actually gave a pretty decent talk. I actually think it’s one of the best talks I’ve ever given, in terms of content. It’s just that my delivery was completely self-reflective, even self-absorbed, leaving little space for anyone to hear it!

Not only am I glad I did it, but I am grateful for the opportunity, the patience and kindness of the audience and organizers. It felt thrilling and necessary, like a great act of daring. In the process I learned more from that failure than any previous success I’ve had. Most importantly about how next time, in order to be true to my words I need to embody that truth not only in the process of writing, but also in the process of speaking those words aloud with authenticity and conviction!

As Theodore Rossevelt said more recently via Brene Brown, “. . . and who at the worst, if he fails, at least fails while daring greatly. . .” One step closer to daring greatly in order to be true to my words both in writing. Thank you Theodore and Brene. May you be moved to dare greatly yourself. Just don’t forget to be vulnerable, connect to and be with the audience, remember it’s about them, feel free to forget yourself and there you’ll be, true to your words in heart and mind!

Photo by tedxgrandrapids

    Facebook
    Twitter
    Google+

    About Latest Posts

Albert Flynn DeSilver
Albert Flynn DeSilver
Albert Flynn DeSilver is an internationally published poet, writer, speaker, and workshop leader. Albert served as Marin County’s very first Poet Laureate from 2008-2010. His work has appeared in more than 100 literary journals worldwide. Join him for discussions about writing and poetry and upcoming events at Facebook.com/Albert.Flynn.DeSilver.Author
Hold the Wheel and Drive
Hold the Wheel and Drive

Developing Self-Confidence: Why Most People Approach It Completely Wrong
Developing Self-Confidence: Why Most People Approach It Completely Wrong

There Is Courage In Being Vulnerable
There Is Courage In Being Vulnerable

How to Sharpen Your Networking Skills

Last week I was on a 4 day training course in Downtown Vancouver, so it seemed like the perfect opportunity to sharpen my networking skills. I am normally fairly quiet and introverted, so I often need to make an effort when it comes to networking and the like. That said,…

From Depression to Happiness: The 4 Steps That Helped to Change My Life
From Depression to Happiness: The 4 Steps That Helped to Change My Life

5 Life Lessons I Learned From Changing My Gender
5 Life Lessons I Learned From Changing My Gender

14 Comments

    Katharine Di Cerbo  on January 4, 2016 at 7:47 am

    Hi Albert,

    Thank you for sharing this very relatable story! Wow, how brave of you.

    I think it’s crappy that the other speakers were shut off from you! I wonder if you would have felt more comfortable and less nervous if they had been more open!

    Thanks again for sharing your moving story. Best of luck to you!
    ~Katharine
    Reply
        Albert Flynn DeSilver   on February 8, 2016 at 10:41 am

        I know this was a while ago, but I wanted to thank you so much for reading and your kind comments!!
        Reply
    Jan Ramsey Brick    on January 4, 2016 at 1:08 pm

    Oh my gosh! What a horrifying experience. I cannot imagine having no notes and no prompter! I can’t think of a bigger recipe for disaster in my case!

    I love the positive takeaways you have though. “connect with the audience first and foremost. They are not preoccupied with themselves with being seen in a certain way, with being loved, appreciated and understood, as nice as that is.”

    You’re right – the best performers and writers do just that. Thanks for the reminder!
    Reply
    Camilla Hallstrom   on January 4, 2016 at 1:46 pm

    What a great story! While you (and now we) can learn some important lessons from your experience, the main thing is that you DID it. So many people don’t take these kind of opportunities because of fear. Consequently, they never fail but they also never see outside of their comfort zone.
    Reply
        Albert Flynn DeSilver   on February 8, 2016 at 10:43 am

        Thanks so much Camilla, I appreciate your kind thoughts!!
        Reply
    Michele Brown   on January 4, 2016 at 2:30 pm

    Thank you, Albert! I so appreciate you for sharing this heartfelt true and vulnerable piece worth it’s weight in gold! I love how you’ve turned perceived failure into victory by learning a valuable lesson through experience, sharing your insights, and thus allowing us (your readers) to learn along with you. Well done! Your Ted Talk turned out to be much more powerful than you realized!
    Reply
        Albert Flynn DeSilver   on February 8, 2016 at 10:45 am

        Hi Michele, Thanks for your comment. Yeah, sometimes we do underestimate the power of sharing our voice! Sending you all best wishes!!
        Reply
    Sumi    on January 5, 2016 at 9:18 am

    Thank you so much for sharing your experience Albert. I’m a writer with social anxiety, my greatest fear being speaking in public! Working with a psychologist, I’ve been prodded to face my fear. To say it’s been a battle is an understatement. I recall how I would write my talks down and how excruciating it was to memorise it verbatim, which always set me up for failure. I’ve learnt through trial and error what works for me and it definitely has to be speaking from the heart. Not well thought of words written on paper, but thoughts that hold meaning, that the audience can relate to, that you can feel when you speak them, words that touch your soul. I’m never going to the best speaker in the world – and that’s okay, but I’m so proud that I dared to try. I agree with you completely – it doesn’t matter how many times one fails, what matters is that you pick yourself up and try again.
    Reply
        Albert Flynn DeSilver   on February 8, 2016 at 10:46 am

        Dear Sumi,

        Thanks for sharing your experience of vulnerability and bravo to you for taking active steps to transcend! With blessings and best wishes, Albert
        Reply
    Gord    on January 9, 2016 at 12:22 pm

    What a great story. I could relate to every second of your ordeal.

    I live and love all things TED. Such amazing, magical speakers no matter the topic. So I just had to go and watch your TEDx video.

    With your play-by-play article in mind, I watched you “appear to struggle” through your talk and then a strange thing happened. I became interested in what you were saying (about poetry of all things). And then the audience began to respond to you.

    For the next 8 – 9 minutes you became one of those animated, magical TED speakers that I enjoy so much. Your story came alive and you shared some interesting new experiences and ideas.

    As predicted, at the 2 minute warning you reverted back to the “struggle” and your talk tapered off. But YOU DID DELIVER A GREAT TED TALK which I would never have seen without first reading your article today.

    Thank you.
    Reply
    Joy Ghose   on January 15, 2016 at 4:02 am

    Hey Albert,
    Thank you for daring greatly to look objectively at your TEDx setback, learn from your experience and share it with us.
    Most of us usually do not dare take that first step towards our goals for fear of failure. While failure may be inevitable, the first time round, it is essential to overcome our apprehensions and take that initial step. It acts as a great opportunity to learn and move towards success.
    Reply
    Lisa Malone Butwell on January 20, 2016 at 6:48 am

    After reading this I was curious and viewed your TEDx Talk on YouTube. Had I not read this I would not have known you were nervous. But I get it because nerves most often perform within us and the audience can’t tell what’s really going on. Thank you for sharing your experience and being courageous enough to do the TEDx talk despite your nerves.
    Reply
    Garrett Paknis  on January 23, 2016 at 9:32 pm

    Absolutely loved this, Albert! Thanks for finding and sharing your vulnerability in full with us.
    Much appreciated and valued.
    Cheers,
